nihilism is both blessed and cursed with
being an anti etiology first and
foremost and not an ideologies unto
itself
so it's both an advantage and a
disadvantage that by and large when
people when people discover nihilism I
can't say they convert to nihilism they
don't become filled with this enthusiasm
they don't become obsessed with the
notion that they have to go around
convincing everyone else did they also
ought to be nihilists they don't come on
the internet passionate about disputing
the correct definition of nihilism and
this is quite a contrast to just about
every other ideology you can google in
the 21st century to ask you in the
audience to have a little bit of
sympathy for the position of a nihilist
someone who really positively identifies
with the term nihilus and someone does
take the time to explain to his loved
ones friends and friends and family and
people who want to listen the internet
what nihilism means to me and why I
think it might matter in your life yours
yours and yours not everyone in the
audience for at least some of you two
really brief anecdotes one is yesterday
someone wrote to me basically hate-mail
a critique or harsh condemnation of my
channel and it concluded by saying I
don't think that you can reach the
people you'd like to by telling them
that everything they know and love is
wrong and I I posted this to the
internet because I encourage criticism I
wanted my other viewers to read this
criticism but added the footnote at that
point it is very much the core message
of my youtube channel like you could say
it's like my mission and life in many
ways is precisely to reach out to people
and tell them that everything they know
and love is wrong if you can't
sympathize with that about three years
ago there was a short video that went
viral on the Internet and it was taken
by a woman who was wearing the full
Muslim prayer garb that covers
everything but her eyes and she was at
some kind of religious ceremony or event
where all these other people were
freaking out you know enjoying the holy
spirit were caught up in
rapture of this release man she moved
her camera around like this showing the
crowd of all these other people in full
traditional Muslim garb and there was a
caption basically just saying look I'm
the only atheist here like how do you
think I feel like how do you think I
feel
being in a society or being in this
particular ceremony where everyone is
motivated by and swept up in this
ideology that I regard as bad and evil
and wrong now it is worthwhile to
reflect for me and for you in the
audience how would my life be different
if I were born and raised in Saudi
Arabia how would my life be different if
I were born and raised even in Thailand
you know I mean if I were spending my
time really in a kind of fierce
opposition to the ideology of a
profoundly Muslim society or profoundly
Buddhist society it would be a very
different struggle right but in this
society here and now even though the
alienation may not be as obvious to you
in the audience I really do live with
that kind of alienation from society
I really do live in that kind of
constant state of nihilistic opposition
now it's true that nihilism goes beyond
atheism nihilism goes beyond the
rejection of any particular religion or
the rejection of all religion in some
but nevertheless I think that anecdote
it's a good way to reach out to be once
they locate you sympathize with a
position I'm in and yes I mean on
matters both trivial and profound and
when I'm talking to people you know my
own mother my own closest friends and
colleagues very often whether I'm polite
or impolite
whether I'm flattering or
confrontational actually what I'm trying
to get across to them is that everything
they know and love is wrong and if you
have friends or relatives who are Muslim
or Mormon or Orthodox Jews you also may
have this this experience and whether or
not I'm compassionate or whether or not
I'm well-spoken or charismatic in
getting that across that actually is the
final situation right or wrong that's my
struggle right so let's be honest about
that let's be honest about that as
nihilists and if you people are idiots
to be honest about it in terms of your
own ideology most people who encounter
nihilism personally subjectively
individually do encounter it as a
liberating ethic as a liberating new
approach to how to think about their own
lives in the world
I saw a kind of tragicomic example of
this here on YouTube
there was a youtuber who was a left-wing
anarchist or a narco communist and like
a lot of those people he spent most of
his time defending the ideology
I can't even say really discussing
philosophy it's really about defending
your own ego in as much your ego is
attached to this abstract word and then
someone else says oh well if your name
is attached to communism communism
killed millions of people and then they
want to defend the word and the concept
of communism oh no no you didn't define
this word correctly I did and again as I
said at the opening this video it's both
of blessing and a curse for nihilists
that by and large most nihilist wants to
kind of get the message of nihilism they
don't spend their time they don't even
spare their time doing academic debates
at universities about like what's the
correct definition of nihilism whereas
you know whether you're a communist or a
Catholic you spend your whole life
trying to define this ideologies and fix
3 and examine your own human heart and
examine the sacred text you know it can
the ideology can never be pure enough
and you yourself can never be pure
enough in the eyes the ideology this
becomes your lifelong burden most
nihilists kind of respond to this
movement
oh ok I get it you know that's not the
meaning of life I have to actually
direct all my focus and energy to me
leading a meaningful life and my
meaningful life is gonna be about me and
what I can do you know it's not gonna be
about my life being in service to a
church or a political party or what's
much more slippery it's not going to be
in service to an abstract idea like God
itself or Catholicism itself or
communism self what have you there was
this youtuber and he used to be a
left-wing anarchist and suddenly in his
relatively old age he discovered the
philosophy of Max Turner
so max Turner for many people is kind of
a gateway to nihilism and he had this he
had this Epiphany
he had this sudden realization that the
point of life is not coming on internet
and defending and contesting these
political ideologies he came to the
conclusion that what really matters in
life is how you live it as he put it
daily practice what you actually do with
your day he suddenly realized really
matters and being in touch with your own
creative nothingness where he's
basically directly borrowing Max Turner
as as translationally he realized that
what he really wants to do is be a
creative highly motivated person who's
making the most out of every day and
making the most out of the next five
years of his life that he has to work on
leading a meaningful life himself and a
productive and creative life a unique
life was a real sterner term putting a
lot of emphasis on your uniqueness great
and that really he's been completely
wrong for the last several years of his
life in service to these ideologies okay
now as I say it was kind of tragicomic
if you know the philosophy of Max Turner
watching that particular YouTube video I
have to admit was kind of laugh-out-loud
funny but nevertheless I mean this is
also as an anecdote that illustrates the
blessing and the curse of what nihilism
is for people I think kind of both
subjectively and objectively okay so I'm
going to run down here what I think is
most important about the universal
definition of nihilism what nihilism
means in each and every case for all of
us regardless of the particular ideology
it's negating more than just a second
and then gonna talk very briefly about
the subjective reality which is what
most of us care about it gets short
shrift in this video you don't want the
video to be too long okay and you may
ask how is it possible there's something
Universal about nihilism isn't it just
the case that some people living under
communism in the Soviet Union negative
communism they rejected communism they
were critics of communism they discarded
communism and then they took the next
step of kind of discarding all ideology
and then that became one form of
nihilism and
meanwhile in the Muslim world some
people are gonna reject Islam in the
Hindu world some people are going to
reject Hinduism and take that next step
so it's not just the critique of a
particular belief but is the critique
and rejection of all beliefs why would
that lead to something Universal I think
it does and I think it does in the same
sense that the numeral zero is universal
regardless of the language you speak
every language in the world has to have
a word for zero no matter how the
concept of zero was discovered or how it
may be written in different notation
systems different languages it's written
differently in Chinese than it is in
English so on and so forth still if
there's one thing we have in common it's
nothing the zero that's at the base of
nihilism both as anti ideology and as a
positive ideologies I think it is
something universal even though people
discover it in different ways and do
different things okay
nihilism of one kind or another and I'm
reading text here which is very much you
know nihilism of one kind or another can
arise at any time in any historical
context however the setting that
nihilism arises from will give it
distinctive features both as a private
personal philosophy and in a larger
scale that it might operate on so for
example nihilism could operate on the
larger scale of a group of authors a
group of artists could be 15 people but
it could also be a political movement
you know it could also be an
organization that's trying to destroy
the Catholic Church you know it could be
a specific negating political social
religious mission that song in a
different context but obviously it could
just be one person alone reading max
Turner one person with a youtube channel
it's easy to imagine that someone who
rejects Hinduism ends up discovering
nihilism only to articulate a philosophy
that's completely different from someone
who grew up in Eastern Europe before
1989 and he was primarily concerned with
the critique of totalitarian political
ideology in their own process of
discovering nihilism all right in these
first few words we've hinted that
there's something worth explaining here
what do we mean in assuming that there
is one thing called nihilism and
different people can discover this one
Universal thing in different culture
contacts independently regardless of the
particular set of ideologies and beliefs
that they're negating the moreover what
do we mean by saying that nihilism can
nevertheless be significantly different
in different times in different social
settings alright and then we have to ask
the question of whether or not it's
useful to speak of new nihilism in
contrast to old and perhaps your
nihilism
in contrast to mine alright subjectively
the experience of nihilism is a critique
of belief that goes beyond complaining
about a particular ideology or belief
system to ultimately reject belief as
such the opposite position commonly
espoused in American culture is that
belief itself is virtuous and that being
a believer is an important part of being
a virtuous person even if people
disagree on the particular beliefs in
this sense a Catholic can approve of the
faith of a Hindu even though they
believe in different things because they
recognize common elements of belief and
this is very common if you study
religion or no religious people it's
very common to meet someone who will
tell you that even though they
personally are a Catholic or a Lutheran
whatever their their religion is that
they can still recognize the validity of
what Muslims are doing or Hindus are
doing some rival group because they
recognize that prayer is still prayer
you know the some abstract notion that
they still recognize that these people
in a rival religion they're in some
sense of basing themselves before a
superior being
they'll articulate to you what they feel
all religions have in common or at least
two or three religions have in common
right and they will affirm that faith is
something they value about being a good
person themselves and then they can they
can discern that in someone else I don't
know how many Christians can recognize
that in communists or vice versa
so it doesn't it doesn't bridge across
all ideological gaps but nevertheless
the common the common delusion that
faith is virtue or even that all virtue
relies on and derive
from faith this binds these things
together in one category right
so they Catholics Hindus communists they
hallow a similar process of thinking
they have a parallel sense of sacredness
self-sacrifice prayer purity they hone
their minds in a similar way even though
they do not worship the same gods and
they do not recognize the same legends
revelations miracles rituals and so on
when looking at the religions in detail
the good Hindu may easily praise the
Catholic for being a believer and in
doing so the Hindu approves of himself
also as a believer the positive value of
belief is upheld as something unrelated
to the particular thing being believed
in so the subjective experience of
nihilism results from the rejection of
these assumptions beliefs ceases to be a
virtue that's what I'm asserting here as
the universal zero point of what all
forms of nihilism new and old yours and
mine anti-clerical and anti-communist
what all forms of nihilism have in
common all right
the process of training oneself to live
in a state of pious ignorance become
suspect or even loathsome once you have
rejected this assumption that believing
is virtuous the enthusiasm for sacred
concepts or even sacred people that
believers train themselves to feel
starts to seem childish or insane from
the perspective of a nihilist whether we
regard this new attitude as shallow or
profound as immaterial my point here is
that it has implications far beyond the
critique of any particular religion or
any particular ideology with this change
accomplished
Annihilus could not possibly reject the
Catholic faith to then accept the Hindu
faith and this is an important point you
know it's not just that you're rejecting
communism in order to sign up with
another similar competing political
ideology it's not just that you're
rejecting Christianity to convert to
Hinduism because this is a very
fundamental rejection of faith
belief and the training of the mind
that's associated with those virtues
over time the way of thinking the way of
living the way of acting that derives
from you know ultimately those those
habits of mind that that do include
prayer and you know numerous other
expressions indeed even when you talk to
communists the extent to which some
things are thinkable and others are
unthinkable the way in which they really
embody their beliefs and live with the
tenets of communism as a kind of faith
if you spent time in communist that also
will soon enough soon become
significantly okay does it matter that
there's a difference between old
nihilism and new your nihilism in mind
yes
but I think to a limited extent I have
spoken to nihilus on the internet who
said to me and I immediately understood
with a met that they identified as a
cosmological nihilist they look at the
universe they look at biology they look
at evolution they look at geological
time how many millions of years have
passed just to create a rock that's
lying on the ground and they evaluate
human life belief ideology in that
context and then find human ideologies
to do close to that that for them is the
way they entered into nihilism and it's
worth pointing out that is a perspective
that's very easy to gain today in the
year 2020 it was much harder to gain
that cosmological perspective in 1920 it
required real brilliance and independent
research to gain that perspective in
1820 and a very very few people on the
leading edge of science people who were
aristocrats could have had that view of
the world in 1720 and when we go back to
15 2014 20 maybe it becomes entirely
impossible right so it's just worth
noting yes this is profoundly
conditioned by the historical and social
setting you're living in right so
cosmological nihilism
is a new type of nozzle or relatively
new it's probably the last 100 years
people have increasingly felt this way
and indirectly you know the discovery of
the atom bomb the discovery of DNA many
of these things will contribute to the
okay now my version of nihilism I
instead describe as historical nihilism
that when you study and learn from the
history of the world including
Thucydides in ancient Greece including
the failure of communism in Europe the
failure of communism in China and so on
I think that out of an understanding of
human nature and real world history as a
process I come to again the same
conclusion I do think there's this one
universal notion of one element I come
to the conclusion that faith is not a
virtue that believing is not virtuous
and I step beyond the critique of
particular beliefs to reject all beliefs
entirely right and then the question
remains how much common ground is there
how much potential is there for
cooperation between people who are in
this sense members of different schools
of thought within the nihilism I came to
say within it's not it's not like
there's a tent we're all standing of it
right we're all mutually alienated but
we share to some extent this experience
we share some kind of negation of
ideologies leading up to this
realization and taking on this
perspective of the world and again it's
both the strength and the weakness of
nihilism that most people respond to
this discovery not by trying to convert
others to nihilism but asking how do I
lead a meaningful life now nail that I
have to look within myself for the
resources the motivation the direction
that I have to make my own path I'm no
longer looking in the sky I'm no longer
looking above me of whether to a literal
God or to abstract concepts or even to
books you know idiot oceans come before
I realize that it's it's my creative
burden life to decide to to what a
meaningful life is gonna be to do the
work to create it for myself ex nihilo
out of my own creative nothingness as
Max Turner would say and I think each of
us correctly feels that in that mission
and in that challenge we are profoundly
alone I think there's some potential
especially with the ease of Association
the internet for nihilus to discover
what is they have and
and perhaps there's an even greater
potential for us to learn from our
mutual alienation I would love to have a
conversation with someone who grew up in
a communist country like Laos or
Cambodia and hear them talk about how
maybe when they were a teenager they
started questioning what the Communist
Party was telling them and how they
emerged in that ideology and how they
view the history of the Communist Party
now as opposed to what they were taught
in school I would love to hear that I
would love to hear a nihilist
perspective on growing up in Cambodia or
Laos and I defy you I think today that
story is not told on any YouTube channel
I don't think it's told on any website I
don't know if it's told in any book
right and you could then fill in the
list with a whole lot of other
ideologies including even anarchism
including even feminism I would love to
hear a nihilist perspective from someone
who used to be a true believer in third
wave feminism and then got disillusioned
with that and moved on to a critique of
belief analysis even if it's just
learning from the alienness of our
respective experiences I think that
could be something tremendously powerful
tremendously meaningful now in the 21st
century